hi I'm Rob Neal deputy superintendent of
the United States Fire Administration at
Emmitsburg Maryland we're talking about
fireplace safety how to enjoy a comfy
cozy fire in your home or in your cabin
in a way that's safe that you can enjoy
it and not have a fire problem in this
particular part we're going to talk
about how to inspect the fireplace to
make sure that it's safe now the first
thing you're going to want to do is take
a look at the fireplace itself and make
sure that there aren't any obvious
cracks fractures or problems with it
now this particular fireplace was built
about 60 or 65 years ago so it's
probably had a lot of fires in it and
probably has some potential problems so
we're going to want to look very closely
around the firebox and make sure that
there's no problems that we can see
they're really obvious and the reason
for that is we don't want any heat that
would escape the firebox to get out into
the wooden part of the building where it
might cause a problem now another thing
that's very very important we want to
make sure we have is a nice metal grate
or a screen like this now a lot of
fireplaces today come with a glass front
and that's that's a fine thing to have
but the go grate or screen like this
it's really handy because what it does
is it catches any sparks that might fly
out of the fireplace and prevents them
from landing on nearby combustible such
as the carpet or other things that might
be around and speaking of combustible
let's take a look at this right here
here's a pile of newspaper that that
we've left by the fireplace
now it's handy to have obviously to
start the fire but in case of a fire we
don't want to have a pile of newspapers
laying right here that could catch fire
so we're just going to pick these up get
them out of the way and we'll come back
to those when we get ready to build a
fire later on now over right here
let's take a look at this thing now this
handle that you see here that actually
controls the damper on this fireplace
now the purpose of the damper is to
regulate the amount of air that flows
through the chimney so you can lessen it
or will allow more to go through and one
of the problems that a lot of people
have is they forget to open the damper
when they're going to start a fire and
what happens is you get a buildup of
smoke in there and it rolls out and you
have a very stinky smelly mess in your
house so we want to make sure that this
damper is in the open position
by pushing that handle in and again
remember that on some modern fireplaces
the damper control is typically inside
the firebox just above the fire itself
where the fire will be itself so you
want to make sure that it is open to
allow the smoke to get out now let's
take a quick look up that chimney just
to make sure that there's nothing there
so we'll move my screen here take
flashlight and get up there and take a
look and see as far as I can see to make
sure it is clear and so after you check
in there you want to make sure that
there's clear and you can see all the
way to the sky often times at the first
fire of the season you might find that
there's a problem in the chimney it's
not uncommon for birds or squirrels to
build nest in there and cause an
obstruction in the fireplace flue stack
so make sure that it's clear that you
can see all the way to the sky all right
we've talked about what to look for in
the firebox we've talked about the
screen making sure that we don't have
combustibles anywhere near the firebox
when we're burning and importantly
making sure that that damper is all the
way open up next we're going to talk to
you a little bit about selecting a
different type of fireplace for your
home
you